---
date: 2024-09-17
title: 'Why have a static blog?'
description: 'my thoughts on building my own blog from scratch'
author: Rodolpho Alves
published: true
lang: en
---

## Why

Yikes, here we are again! This is the second time I'm attempting to rewrite my personal 'website' into something I like.

Some context: so far this site had been built with Vue 2 and is a bit over-engineered given that all it does is display some static information.

So, as a small PTO project, I have decided to give it a go in rewriting this into something that is better suited for static content! This will also serve as a chance for me to reconnect with some of my Software Engineering skills that laid latent in the last few years as I focused on more of the Managerial aspects of my career.

## How

After some research (on Google and ChatGPT both) I decided to either use `astro` or `vitepress` for this project but I ended up picking `vitepress` due to its flexibility and given that I already used `astro` on [my gravel cycling's website](https://github.com/rodolphocastro/br.com.gravel-alves) and already ran into some hiccups when trying to make things a bit more 'seamless' (such as having a simple modal) to provide users a more pleasant experience.

### The journey to create this website

So first things first I created a high-level plan of things I needed in order to have the bare minimum of this working:

- [ ] a way to create content using markdown
- [ ] a way to have such content listed programmatically
- [ ] a way to support content being both in portuguese and english
- [ ] a way to have this website automatically deployed to my github pages

After I picked `vitepress` as the tool I quickly went to its [docs](https://vitepress.dev/guide/what-is-vitepress) and [source code](https://github.com/vuejs/vitepress/tree/main/docs) to understand the mechanics of vitepress and what constraints were imposed as well as which APIs I had available to play with.

I quickly understood how the i18n built-in support worked (and its quirks with the default language, a bit of a bummer) and went straight ahead to lay down the foundation of this website: replacing the default index with something more personal and that could take me from a home page over to my curriculum. Why the curriculum? Because it didn't require me to learn how to deal with the content loading API just yet and gave me time to play around the settings on the default theme!

With the curriculum out of the way I decided it was time to set up some guardrails so I quickly googled up and learned how to use the latest (at time of writing) ESLint 9.x and Prettier, this wasn't as smooth as I expected since my last experience with ESLint was pretty outdated but after understanding the flat config things got to an acceptable point.

Finally I went ahead and began tapping into the more advanced stuff, looking at the official VueJS blog to see samples of how the content loading api worked and how I could use it to support posting in both pt-br and en-us without having to manually keep two different sidebars. This went smooth, after learning the difference between `.ts` and `.mts`, and I then turned my focus on using GitHub Copilot to help me scaffold two Vue components: one to list all the Articles and one to act as a Card itself.

### Closing remarks

Yes this was a bit over-engineered but not as much as this site's previous iteration! Looking at the code footprint this is way more straightforward and maintainable for a one-person project while still providing plenty of room for growth. One day I might want to install TailwindCss to make this a bit prettier but for now the default Vitepress theme suffices.

Albeit it feeling odd to use a "documentation" framework to built a site that contains articles and my resume the framework holds up surprisingly well, is quite quick to compile and deploy and doesn't lack documentation!
